[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I'm Barbara Marx Hubbard.
Welcome to "The New Politics,
Synergistic Democracy."
>> Two, one, zero,
all engines running.
Lift off, we have a lift off.
>> Clear.
The eagle has landed.
>>Rocket tranquility, we copy
you on the ground to fight.
You've got a bunch of
guys about to turn blue.
We're freezing again.
Thanks a lot.
Clear, Neil we can see you
coming down the ladder now.
>> I'm at the foot
of the ladder.
That's one small step for man
one giant leap for mankind.
>> I was so thrilled when
I saw that lunar landing,
and my understanding was
actually we're coming to become
a new world species.
We're building new
worlds on this Earth,
and we will be building
new worlds in space.
We're being born as
a universal species.
I was absolutely thrilled,
and what I did at that time,
as I had been a promoter
of the space program,
is I called on my friends who
were physicists and scientists,
many of them in the
military-industrial complex.
And I asked us together to
develop a new, long-range goal
for humanity.
We called it building new worlds
on Earth, new worlds in space,
new worlds in the human mind.
So I had drawn the
military-industrial complex
into a long-range positive
goal for humanity,
and my partner
John Whiteside was
the Chief Officer of Information
for the Air Force in New York.
He had done live coverage
of the space program itself,
and one day, he took me to meet
the US sergeants of the United
States.
That was like 1,000 sergeants.
So I made a speech
to the sergeants,
and I said, what would you
do if your president asked
you to build new
worlds on this Earth
and help build new
worlds in space?
What would you think of this?
The sergeants of America
stood up and cheered,
and I realized that this
goal would be very popular
within the military, within the
sergeants, and all the people
who were evolutionaries.
So it was an amazing goal
that I had discovered.
Out of this, we literally
created a new global proposal
which we called Building
new worlds on Earth,
new worlds in space, new
worlds in the human mind.
So John Whiteside and I decided
to call on Congressman Olin
Teague.
Tiger Teague he
was called, and he
was Chief of the Science
and Technology Committee
of the US Congress.
So Tiger Teague loved
the space program,
and he was enthusiastically
listening to us when I told him
about the new global goal.
And I said, why don't we
call the members of Congress
committees together
to look at this.
Do you think Congress would
approve of this for the United
States and for the
world and offer it
to the rest of the world?
And Tiger Teague
said, Barbara, we
can't call the
committees of Congress
together to look at anything.
I said, then how do you
get anything done, Tiger?
He said, we don't.
You do it, Barbara.
I was like, what?
I was wanting the US Congress
to set a new national goal
for the world and offer it
as an international goal,
and he said, you do it.
So John Whiteside, my Chief
Officer of Information,
and myself went to have lunch,
and we pondered what to do.
And John, who had been doing
the live coverage of the space
program was very talented.
He said, let's put
everybody into a wheel.
He said, you can't
change the world
with speakers talking to
people sitting in rows.
People sitting in
rows can't do it,
but if we put people who
are in science, in health,
in education, who disagree
with each other in the wheel
to look for common
goals and to match
their own needs with
other people's resources,
maybe Tiger Teague was
right, we should do it.
So John happened to have a son
who was at Southern Illinois
University which was sort of
out of the range of most people
that I knew.
And it happened that
Buckminster Fuller
was a scholar in
residence there,
and John's son went to SIU.
So we decided to do a conference
at Southern Illinois University
in the wheel, and we
called the wheel SYNCON
for Synergistic Convergence.
So if you want to do a
conference in a wheel,
you can call it SYNCON.
And what happened was the
students built the most
gorgeous looking wheel.
They built it by hand
with removable walls
between sectors of health,
education, economics.
And they had a
circle in the middle,
and they had a staircase,
where you could go up
and you looked at
the social body
as a living organism which
is actually the truth of it.
And so the way we
did the conference
is we invited people
from all over the world
to come and sit in different
sectors of the wheel.
It wasn't just students, but
we had students there as well,
and it was the time of
the student protests.
And so we had a lot of
protesting students,
and we had black power
leaders, and we had
the ambassador from Bangladesh.
And quite a few amazing people,
including ambassador Lazar
Mojsov who at that time was
Director of the Security
Council of the United Nations.
So the SYNCON wheel was
actually a wheel-like structure
based on this wheel, and you
see the different sectors
that were removable walls
between all the sectors.
And that at the center, which
we call here the Planetary
DNA, what we had
there was a ladder,
and people could go and look
at the system as a whole.
Now, this was a very
important time in history,
in the early '70s.
There were student
protests everywhere.
Deans of colleges
were being locked up.
It was somewhat nerve-racking
to go into a college
with all these
students, because they
were angry at the government.
They were angry
at the leadership,
because John Whiteside's
son went to SIU, we got in.
We didn't know if we were
going to be attacked,
but what actually
happened is we invited
the students into the wheel.
And we had students
in every sector
of the wheel along
with well-known people
from all around the world.
And every sector of
the wheel is to state
what do you want
to create, what do
you need to create it in health,
in education, in economics,
and what do you want
to share freely?
So instead of win-lose voting
in the sectors of the wheel,
it's what do you want to create?
Now, when you ask people that,
almost everybody gets excited.
And they're not
antagonistic to each other,
because the fact is
you can't create it
unless somebody else wants
to co-create it with you.
And by asking the
right question-- what
do you want to create, what
do you need to create it,
and what do you want to
share freely, just give away?
People wanted to dance.
They wanted to do singing.
They wanted to do special
things as a giveaway.
The students were thrilled.
We had every sector of the
wheel meeting in small groups,
then they come into the main
part of the auditorium there,
and they look for common goals
and match needs with resources.
And we call this
vocational connecting
or, in my old language,
suprasexual co-creation.
Because what was happening if
you want to create something,
and somebody has
something that you need--
let's say you're the director
of the US Chamber of Commerce
and a long-haired hippy
comes up to you and says,
I have something to offer
you to fulfill your need
for the economic system.
And you see the two of
them-- the long-haired hippy
and the Director
of the US Chamber--
talking.
So what John Whiteside
did is he went up,
and he took pictures of people
sharing, vocational sharing.
And then every evening, he did
the "New Worlds Evening News,"
and he put all these
antagonistic people
sharing in the news themselves.
And when you see yourself
as part of the evening news,
psychologically people
realized they are the news.
The structure of the wheel
and the questions you ask
does not eliminate competition.
It changes the game to
help me create something.
The difference between
win-lose voting, and this
is what I want to
create, and this
is what I need to create it
changes the internal reactions
of people.
Because nobody can
create alone, and this
would be true of all
the protesters as well.
So instead of being
geared up to protest,
they're geared up to say, what
do I actually want to create?
It's easier to be against
something than to be for it,
and we changed the political
game from what am I against,
and how can I win, to
what do I need to create,
and who can join me
to help me create it?
And the difference of those
two questions, win or lose,
or what do I want to create,
and what do I want to give,
changed the political game.
We are reducing the
win-lose scenario
to a new scenario
which is joining
to create what you want to
have happen, because you can't
create it alone.
So the most unlikely
people would
start to join each other
to create something.
Ambassador Mojsov spoke
from there of his vision
of international cooperation,
which he had told us you cannot
possibly get in the
structure of the current UN.
They're structure in
competitive nation states.
If you could bring SYNCONs
to the United Nations
and have people join in wheels
of what they want to create
and what they need
to create it, you
could change the United Nations.
I want you to do that, said he.
We tried, actually, but
we didn't manage to do it.
Meanwhile, at Southern
Illinois University,
we then would bring
everybody back
into their sectors of the wheel,
and we asked the question,
is there anything
missing for anyone
that you still need to
create and have had nobody
respond to you?
So maybe we have 100
people in the wheel,
that's a lot of people
who had been interacting
with each other.
There was silence.
And I'll never forget
this one young man who
was trying to get
marijuana legalized,
and he was being rejected from
various sectors of the wheel
during the meeting.
He came in, and he
knelt down at the center
of this circle of people.
And my partner John
Whiteside and I
looked at each
other and thought,
now, he could ruin everything,
and here's what he did.
He actually knelt down
like this, and he said,
I think it's going
to be all right.
This is what we really meant.
I don't need to be
promoting marijuana anymore.
In other words, the
high that people
get on when they
cooperate with each other,
and the feeling of pleasure
that this young man who
was getting the feeling of
pleasure from marijuana,
this is a better way to do it.
So Edgar Mitchell
happened to be there.
He said, you know, Barbara, if
we had had a spiritual Geiger
counter, where we could measure
spirituality at this SYNCON,
it would have gone off the
charts, because synergy
creates spirituality.
So we didn't have to mention
let's become spiritual.
We had to say, what
do you want to create,
what you need to create it,
what do you want to give?
So we organized the next
level of synergistic politics
by doing this.
Meanwhile, during all
this, Buckminster Fuller
who was a Scholar in Residence
at Southern Illinois University
sent his Director of
Communications Tom Turner
to address the whole group.
And Tom Turner said, Dr. Fuller
has something to propose.
He feels that women should
run for political office,
and he proposes that Barbara
Marx Hubbard run for president
of the United States.
The students cheered.
It was a total
off-the-charts statement.
All of this happened in the
1970s, and we continued.
We did 25 SYNCONs.
From that first
SYNCON, we did SYNCONs
with gang leaders
of Los Angeles.
We did SYNCONs with
the space scientists
in Huntsville, Alabama.
We did SYNCONs with the General
Federation of Women's Club.
We did SYNCONs, and
we practiced what
I would call synergistic
democracy all over the country.
But I wore out, and so I
couldn't afford to do it.
John finally, unfortunately,
got cancer and died,
and I was left there
with this knowledge
about synergistic
democracy and not
knowing what to do about it.
And I wasn't really a
political candidate.
I knew that wasn't my
role to run for politics
in the ordinary way.
So what happened, in 1984,
was the Year of the Woman,
if you remember in politics.
And somebody came to me,
Ward Phillips from Seattle--
I remember it clearly--
and he said, Barbara,
why don't you
run for vice president of
the United States in 1984?
It's the Year of the Woman,
just declare it and run.
So I had to announce,
and I had to sign up,
I'm running for vice president
of the United States.
I signed up with the
Democratic Party.
They paid no attention to me.
The media ignored me completely.
I had nothing to say
that I was against,
and my platform was new worlds
on earth, new worlds in space,
new worlds in the human mind.
I decided to do it myself.
My partner Carolyn
Anderson with groups
of people from
northern California
decided to be a
committee for me.
And I wrote to all my different
friends around the country,
and I said, I'm running
for vice president.
Would you give a party for me?
Well, they thought it was
funny, but it was interesting.
Barbara's running
for vice president.
We'll give a party for her.
So what happened was I went to
wherever what party was being
prepared for me, and
I said, my proposal
is that in the Office
of the Vice President
a new function is established.
We called it an
Office for the Future
to scan for, map,
connect, and communicate
what's working in the world.
And the purpose of
the vice president's,
said I in all these
small groups I went to,
is to tell the world
every week what's working.
We only hear what isn't working.
The president has to
deal with every crisis,
and the news only tells
us what's breaking down.
The people don't know
what's working, say I.
Well, that's absolutely true.
So what happened was
every single center
I went to wanted to create
their own Office for the Future.
Yes, it was nice
that Barbara wanted
to run for vice president,
but how about me in Seattle?
How about me in Chicago?
So these little Positive Future
Centers, they were called,
they cropped up all
over the country,
and there were 90 Positive
Future Centers by the time
it was time for me to go to
San Francisco to be nominated.
Well, I had not been
covered by the media.
I had not been noticed
by the Democratic Party.
And a friend said to
me, now, Barbara, you've
done a nice job, but
you'll be ridiculed
if you go to San
Francisco and try
to get into the Democratic
National Convention
and propose this to somebody.
There's no chance in the
world for you to do that,
and you've already
done a good job.
Don't go.
So that's one of
those times in life
you have to check in
with your inner voice,
and the inner voice said,
Barbara, go to San Francisco.
So with a small team
I go to San Francisco,
and I didn't have a
pass to the floor.
And it turns out that the wife
of the governor of Colorado
knew me, and she
said, let Barbara in.
I was let in with maybe
eight or nine friends who
had been in these
Positive Future Centers
into the Democratic National
Convention knowing nobody.
The thing is, you have to
get 200 delegates to sign
a petition to place your name
in nomination for vice president
in order to be
proposed publicly.
And of course, a lot of
people wanted to do it,
because you get a
national speech.
People like Jesse Jackson
and others were trying.
So this is what I did.
First morning, 5:30
AM, South Dakota,
I go to the South Dakota caucus.
There may be a few
stragglers at 5:30,
and I'll say my name is
Barbara Marx Hubbard,
and I request that
you nominate me
for vice president
of the United States.
And what I will do is I will
be able to make a speech
to say that the Democratic
Party is interested in finding
out and communicating
what's working
in the world for
the vice presidents.
And if you let me make that
speech, if you nominate me,
I'll turn my votes over
to Geraldine Ferraro.
Because she's a real
politician, and I'm not,
but I want to make
that speech for you,
for the Democratic Party.
They signed up, and
by the second day,
myself and my small team
had over 200 delegates
nominating me, proposing me
for the nomination for vice
president.
And the Democratic Party had to
announce two women's names are
placed in nomination, Geraldine
Ferraro and Barbara Marx
Hubbard.
We must attract friend and
foe alike to a new challenge,
the building a new
worlds on this earth
and new worlds in space.
>> Though this is
still an allusive goal
in the government, it has
remained the driving force
behind Barbara's efforts.
>> So what was my mindset that
gave me the courage to do what
was considered to be--
including by myself-- an
almost impossible task?
When you say yes to an impulse
that is of divine import--
and you're not being selfish--
when you say yes,
you are empowered
to fulfill your mission.
Now, there's a lot
that goes in there.
You have to have a
really good idea.
You have to say yes not
for your own self-interest
but because you know it's
something needed for world.
When it was announced
at the convention
that two women's names would
be placed in nomination,
I have to admit, I was stunned.
It's one thing to
think of a higher power
and that it's going to happen,
but for it to actually happen
was stunning to me.
And I was shocked, and
I didn't have my speech,
because nobody thought I would
actually be making the speech.
Even though I was
determined to do it,
you see, there was a kind of
mixed message inside myself.
So as it was announced that
I was now to make my speech--
and it's very
important, because I
was imagining this in all these
yoga centers and small churches
around the country.
And there I was walking
up this stairway,
and there was Senator Kennedy
and these various senators
and they're looking,
who is that?
How did this happen to us?
An unknown person
does not do this.
So I'm just telling this to be
a magical reality for anybody
with an internal yes.
When you say yes to the
evolutionary impulse
within you, you are saying
yes to the impulse of creation
itself which is in
every one of us.
And your yes, when
said with certainty
and no fear of failure,
activates evolution itself.
That's what I see now in
looking at what I did.
I would like to see
that happen now.
The reason I think
this can happen now
is because democracy
really is failing.
Win-lose democracy is a
structure that actually cannot
create cooperation.
It's designed for win-lose,
and it was a great advance
over dictatorship or monarchy.
But if our job now is to
create global co-creativity
and connect people worldwide,
we need to evolve democracy,
and I believe
synergistic democracy.
Using a wheel-shaped environment
to bring separate parts
together is the right
structure for democracy.
So it's obvious, although
it was a great advance over
dictatorship or monarchy, it
cannot by structure create
a global world.
So I am saying, the evolution
of the structure of democracy
needs to happen, and
the way it can happen
is we can do it first ourselves.
We can do it on internet.
We can do it on Gaia TV.
We can do it wherever we
are given the opportunity
to connect separate parts
on internet and on media.
And we can become the news
without being nominated
for vice president,
and I believe
the new news will eventually
affect the actual news
and effect democracy.
Buckminster Fuller said,
play a better game ourselves.
And here's what I think will
happen when we demonstrate it
on internet, which
we're doing here
right on Gaia TV as an example.
That the political
parties will begin
to say, how could
we connect what's
creative within our structure,
and they could overcome
their win-lose structure.
It's not made to be that way.
They could still have different
political parties that
were trying to join Genius.
So I would call upon
existing political leaders
to be able to take that step.
But the first step
would be all of us
who want to do it, let's do
it on media and internet,
and let's learn the process
of synergizing what works.
And if you remember Ilya
Prigogine who came up
with dissipative structure
for Nobel Prize winning,
he said that when a
system is dysfunctional,
innovations occur everywhere.
And at some point, there
is a non-linear exponential
interaction of innovations,
and what happens
is the system flips
and cooperates
in its own self-transcendence.
I was originally inspired by
Teilhard de Chardin now so
many years ago.
And he said, when
the noosphere--
which is the thinking
layer, now the internet--
gets its collective eyes--
that is, we turn each
other on on internet,
just like I'm suggesting--
he felt it would
lead, in his language,
to the Christification
of the Earth.
We could say that in
more secular terms,
aiming at a planetary
awakening in love
through a unique self-symphony,
which is everybody's voice
heard joined Genius.
Actually, we're right at
the threshold of doing it.
While we bring in all
these different people who
are already doing it,
it's important to remember
that we already have at our
growing edge extended lifespan.
We have extended capabilities
in our science and technology,
as they do at
Singularity University.
Where we have powers
of ancient gods
to add to the impulse of
evolution to join Genius,
to add to the
dangerous time we're
at that requires us to move.
We have everything we
need to do this now.
Now is the time, this is the
hour, and we are the people.